Id: 1887
Title: 2005 prediction - the rise of anonymous p2p
Date: 2004-12-30T21:55:29-08:00
Status: hidden
Format: Markdown
--------------
**"So sue me" - [he said](http://www.nanocrew.net/blog/). And that's
what they did.**

End of 2004 was the time of legal battles.
[RIAA](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Riaa) and
[MPAA](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mpaa) started suing anybody they
could. Let's not kid ourselves: they had the right to sue. And they
[will win those battles](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pyrrhic_victory).
The question is: will they [win the
war](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Art_of_War)?

**["I say to you](http://cryptome.org/hrcw-hear.htm) that the common man
is to the American film producer and the American public as the Boston
strangler is to the woman home alone."**

Their first problem is alienating the costumers. RIAA and MPAA replaced
Microsoft as the most hated corporate entity in the blogosphere. Are
they right? Are they wrong? Nobody cares but everybody is pissed. And
that anger is a good way to justify illigal behaviour of downloading
music or movies. In the past MPAA was able to [sput
nonsense](http://www.google.com/search?hl=en&lr=&q=%22Boston+strangler+is+to+the+woman+home+alone%22&btnG=Search)
to congress members without anyone noticing but today at least the
weblogging and weblog-consuming part of the society is watching and they
are not amused by the rethoric.

**"One more such victory and I shall be lost!"**

The bigger problem is that they started a war they cannot win. What
we've learned from [Napster](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Napster) and
[BitTorrent](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bittorrent) is that a
technology for file-sharing can be built literally by one person and its
popularity skyrocket in just few months. Current protocols have flaws
that enable RIAA and MPAA to use legal system to shut them down.

Napster had a flaw of being centrialized. It was a matter of winning one
case to shut them down forever.

BitTorrent, Kazaa and other decentralized networks cannot be killed that
way but they make it trivial to track down people who upload files. That
allows RIAA and MPAA to sue individuals. That's a very expensive way to
fight p2p file sharing but I hear they still make lots of money. And
they can always compensate by showing more ads in theaters or inserting
ads in the middle of songs. Besides, this is more of a scare tactic:
they don't have to sue everyone who uses p2p because in the end MPAA
execs would be the only ones not being sued. They just have to convince
public at large that downloading songs or movies is too dangerous, not
worth the risk of being sued.

**"It cannot be traced. It cannot be stopped."**

Creating an anonymous p2p network that will make pin-pointing individual
file shares impossible on a practical level isn't that hard. And I
predict that in 2005 an anonymous p2p network will rise in popularity
rivaling current popular p2p networks.

This might happen as an anonymous overlay network like
[Tor](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Art_of_War) or as a new,
specialized networked protocol.

My other prediction is that after the studios will loose ability to use
lawyers to stop file sharing, it'll take them about 5 years to offer a
product that is able to compete with BitTorrent.
