Id: 314001
Title: SEO is harder than you think
Date: 2010-08-13T17:39:27-07:00
Format: Markdown
Tags: marketing, business
--------------
Here is a frequent advice for aspiring entrepreneur: even before you
launch your product, start a blog. Blog about topics related to your
product, the product itself, blog about anything.

It’s a good advice, I just wish it was followed with “but don’t expect
miracles” qualifier.

## Bad expectations

People giving this advice usually provide 37signals or Joel Spolsky as
examples of bloggers that have hundreds of thousands of readers and who
used that attention to launch very successful businesses.

The thing is: your blog won’t get hundereds of thousands of readers and
you need more than than to build a successful business.

This is a common problem called [survivorship
bias](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Survivorship_bias): when we only look
at successes, we only see successes. It seems like being successful is
the only natural state of being. What we don’t see is thousands of other
people who started blogs, put as much effort into them as 37signals did
and don’t have much to show for it.

## You’re not a handsome billionaire

It’s true: 37signals and Joel Spolsky built huge readerships. It’s also
true that they are incredibly good writers and you are not.

Another way to get lots of traffic is by being a celebrity. Ashton
Kutcher doesn’t have so many followers because his tweets are so much
better than yours or mine. Steve Jobs will get coverage on engadget
based on enigmatic e-mail with few words.

But you’re not a handsome millionaire, you wont get attention of a
celebrity and you’re unlikely to produce top quality content like Joel
Spolsky.

## How to attract traffic and why you shouldn’t

There are ways to engineer your posts for maximum traffic.

One is to be controversial or polarizing. Few years ago I wrote a post
critical of Google. For the proverbial 15 minutes it attracted the
attention of blogosphere. Some were criticizing my arguments, some were
agreeing but they all were linking. My RSS subscriber count shot up.

For a moment, I was living a dream but was this traffic really worth
much as a way to promote a product or build a lasting, focused
readership base? Probably not. Since I didn’t follow up with similarly
exciting posts, I just earned a bunch of disappointed readers.

Another is to write inane, superficial posts. “5 ways to achieve long
lasting success”. “What I’ve learned driving Honda to work today”.

Posts like that pretend to address a universal need (who doesn’t want
long lasting success) or tickle innate human curiosity (“I wonder what
did he learn”) but they result in drive by traffic from ADD generation.
You spent 5 minutes writing it, they’ll spend 1 minute reading it and
will move to another inane, superficial post. Such traffic is not
valuable to you.

The one way to attract traffic that I recommend is to write thoughtful,
high-quality posts that provide useful information. That will build a
readership base of people looking for thoughtful, useful content (as
opposed to people looking for sensationalist headlines). More
importantly, it’ll build your reputation and people will be more likely
to listen to you when you have something to sell to them.

## How to achieve mediocrity in eight years, just like me.

What kind of traffic can you realistically expect for your blog? I’ll
use myself as an example, because that’s the only example I have.

I’ve been blogging for 8 years. I wrote \~650 posts. I have one popular
open-source program (5k downloads per day) and a few less popular ones.

According to feedburner, I have 349 RSS subscribers. According to Google
Analytics, I have 21k visits from 18k unique visitors per month.

I’m not a total looser but its not a smashing success either.

More importantly, even with this decent amount of traffic, I couldn’t
make any given product a success.

## You don’t need a lot of traffic, or seed theory of success.

The reason why you shouldn’t get depressed right about now is this: you
don’t actually need a lot of traffic to successfully promote your
product.

A simplistic way to look at this is: the more traffic you get, the more
people will know about your product, the more people will buy it, the
more money you’ll make.

In reality the quality of your product is a very important multiplier of
that traffic. If your product sucks, no one will buy regardless of how
widely it’s advertised.

If your product is awesomely great, not only will everyone buy it but
they’ll also blog about how great it is and tell everyone they know to
buy it.

Hence my seed theory of success: you need only enough audience to spark
initial interest in your product. How successful it’ll eventually be
will be determined by how good it is, how close to totally awesome, not
by how big the initial audience was. Due to the nature of compound
interest, even a small change in the multiplier (i.e. quality of the
product) will, over time, dwarf the importance of the size of the seed
audience.

Your product is somewhere in between the extremes: it doesn’t totally
suck but it’s also not totally awesome.

The practical consequence of seed theory is: don’t spend too much time
blogging to build traffic. You only need a little bit. Spend the time
making your product remarkable so that other people will blog about it.

## Leave the pimping to pimps.

Ironically, because everyone else is obsessed with blogging for the sake
of building traffic, they’ll do the blogging for your. They’re desperate
for things to blog about, you just have to give them a reason to blog
about your product. The best way to do it is to make it awesome.

## Bend, the pudding with the proof

Don’t believe me? I give you Bend Editor as an example. As far as I can
tell, it didn’t have a blog, its author didn’t make a single blog post
about it. It was just CodePlex project with source code and a
downloadable installer (curiously, it’s no longer available on
CodePlex).

I found it the other day by browsing CodePlex projects that used WPF. I
downloaded it and played with it. It didn’t have many features but it
looked really nice, like a notepad after extreme makeover.

I didn’t blog about it but apparently I wasn’t the only one who
serendipitously found it. Within days major blogs like
[lifehacker](http://lifehacker.com/5604526/bend-makes-for-better-more-attractive-text-editing-on-windows),
[appscout](http://www.appscout.com/2010/08/bend_a_stylish_minimalist_text.php)
and
[downloadsquad](http://www.downloadsquad.com/2010/07/22/bend-is-a-slick-looking-text-editor-in-alpha/)
did blog about it, along with [many
others](http://www.google.com/search?sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8&q=bend+editor).

This is an extreme example that validates my point: quality product will
be noticed even with zero marketing effort on your part.
