Id: 1902
Title: VirtualEarth vs. Google Maps - not hitting the high note
Date: 2005-07-25T14:39:15-07:00
Format: Markdown
Status: hidden
--------------
Let's not kid ourselves: any new online map web service will be
evaluated based on how it compares to Google Maps, the most popular kid
on that block.

If VirtualEarth came out before Google Maps it would have been a great
improvement over clunky yahoo/aol/msn maps. But it didn't so it's just
an also-ran, playing a catch-up game but not yet catching up.

Let's start with the good things:\

-   I like that the map takes the whole width of the browser.
-   I like that how they overlay lists of the results on top of the map
    (and not next to the map, which allows them to use the whole width
    of the browser for the map).
-   I like the scratchpad.

Now, to the ugly, or the gentle art of design.

Judging design is not easy, because there is an element of personal
preferences, but the bottom line is: Google's design is just better.

I did a comparative tour of San Francisco and Seattle and it all starts
with how maps are rendered. Google uses brighter colors. At the same
zoom level the streets seem to be thicker, the street names slightly
more readable, the one-way street arrows more visible. Google's zoom
in/out control (black & white with subtle shadows) is simple yet looking
good while Microsoft's has gradients and feels heavier (and the orange
arrow is plain ugly).

By default VirtualEarth has animated zoom in/out effect that slows down
zoom operation and just looks bad and disorienting (especially the 'zoom
in' part, since instead of just doing transition from current size to
zoomed in, it looks like it zooms in more and then zooms back). This can
be turned off in options, but shouldn't be on by default. It's an
anti-thesis of what's important in web design (usability: yes, "cool"
animation effect: no) and looks like an attempt to cram a feature that
Google doesn't have.

It all adds up to a simple fact that Google Maps feel more enjoyable to
use than Microsoft's.

I much prefer Google's minimalistic approach to design (there's only one
type of a link, and it looks like any other link on the internet i.e.
underlined blue text; buttons look like buttons and there's plenty of
whitespace) than Microsoft's heavy and confused approach (apprently msn
designers think tha t gradients are cool, beveled text is cool,
non-standard links are cool, having two kinds of links is cool).

Now, don't take it as me completely dissing VirtualEarth.
Technologically, it's impressive. Zooming and panning is so fast that it
feels like a desktop app. If it came earlier, it would deserve all the
oohs and aahs. But we have Google Maps which pioneered the essential
breakthrough in maps (giving a majority of the window to the map, fast
zooming and panning, overlaying search results on the map) and got the
design so right, that it's hard to improve upon. I don't see a single
reason to switch to VirtualEarth.

I just read latest Joel's [Hitting the High
Notes](http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/HighNotes.html) article
which mostly re-iterates the "some programmers are 10x better than other
programmers, hence it's important to hire the best programmers you can
find". But there's one more thing in that article that resonated with me
in the context of VirtalEarth vs. Google maps smackdown: some
programmers/designers can do stuff so good that other
programmers/designers are not able to match, regardless of how long they
try. On-line mapping landscape seems to support this theory. While
Google's design might only be better in few things, it is an inspired
and polished design and those few changes make all the difference in the
world.

Google Maps is the iPod of mapping.
